Directus and IoT: Sensor Data with an ESP32 (#159)
directus-labs/guest-authoring: directus-and-iot-sensor-data-with-an-esp32/index.md

```
curl --location 'http://localhost:8055/items/temperature_and_humidity' \
--header 'Authorization: Bearer Vi8m1wdXTEv0rhQtteUWaZKfHTqCOwDx' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--data '{"temperature": 33.34,"humidity": 80.42}'
```

After running the curl command above, you will see a new value in the collection on your Directus dashboard (/admin/content/temperature_and_humidity).

You can run the cURL command with different values of temperature and humidity to see more data in your collection, but first, take a moment to look at the URL used in the cURL command above. It is your Directus root URL at localhost:8055 with a path /items/temperature_and_humidity. Directus gives a straightforward way to interact with collections via a REST API by appending /items to the root URL and then the collection name. You can perform API operations using the standard REST principles such as:

- GET /items/temperature_and_humidity
- POST /items/temperature_and_humidity
- PATCH /items/temperature_and_humidity

> - DELETE /items/temperature_and_humidity

Author: Done

## Connecting the ESP32 and the DHT22 with Physical Components

A DHT22 sensor can connect directly to an ESP32 using three pins. DHT22 comes in two types, 3-pin type and 4-pin type. The 3-pin type doesn't require extra configuration. You connect ground to ground, VCC to 5V output, and data to a GPIO pin, say pin 13. For the 4-pin type, ignore the 3rd pin from the left and connect as shown in the image below:

![DHT22 to ESP32](./DHT22_to_ESP32.png)

### Installing DHT22 Sensor Library

Since you will program your ESP32 using the Arduino IDE, you must install the [DHT sensor library by Adafruit](https://www.arduino.cc/reference/en/libraries/dht-sensor-library/). Search for the "DHT Sensor Library" in your library manager and install the corresponding library authored by Adafruit. Use the image below as a reference.

> ![Installing the DHT22 sensor library](./Installing_the_DHT22_sensor_library.png)

Author: Done

### Connecting the ESP32 Board to your Computer

You can see the values from the DHT22 sensor in the Arduino serial monitor. After connecting your ESP32 to your computer, choose a board and port that corresponds to your purchased board and available port on your computer.

> ![Board selector page](./Board_selector_page.png)

Author: Done

1. Your WiFI SSID, i.e. the name of your WiFi network, as the value of the `ssid` variable on line 6.
2. Your WiFi password on line 7.
3. Your Directus esp32-board user token that you used with cURL at the `Creating dummy temperature and humidity values` section of this article. You can still [regenerate the token if you lost it](./regenerate_lost_token.png). If you have the token, set it as the <TOKEN> placeholder value on line 8.
4. Your WiFi gateway address is defined on line 9 as `directusEndpoint`. It won't start with localhost because the ESP32 is running as a separate system. So you must check the gateway address of your local network. This address will either start with 10, 172, or 192. Follow [this blog post](https://nordvpn.com/blog/find-router-ip-address/) for instructions for checking your gateway address on different operating systems. Note that your ESP32 and your computer running Directus must be connected to the same WiFi network for this to work.

> With all the changes made, you can upload your script to your ESP32 and observe it log temperature and humidity data on your Directus `temperature_and_humidity` collection.

Author: Done

     Serial.println(jsonPayload);

     int httpResponseCode = http.POST(jsonPayload);

     if (httpResponseCode > 0) {
       Serial.print("HTTP Response code: ");
       Serial.println(httpResponseCode);

       String response = http.getString();
       Serial.println(response);
     } else {
       Serial.printf("[HTTP] POST... failed, error: %s\n", http.errorToString(httpResponseCode).c_str());
     }

     http.end();

     Serial.print("Temperature: ");
     Serial.print(temperature);
     Serial.print("°C <-> Humidity: ");
     Serial.print(humidity);
     Serial.println("%");
   } else {
     Serial.println("Error reading sensor data");
   }
 } else {
   Serial.println("Error in WiFi connection");
 }
 delay(30000);
}
```

When you open your Directus content section, you will see the values logged so far. You can increase the delay to reduce the number of logs you get per hour. Currently, the rate is 2 logs per minute (1 log every 30 seconds), so 120 logs per hour. This may or may not work for you depending on your use case.

![Dashboard with logs](./Dashboard_with_logs.png)

> ## Visualizing the logged data using Directus Dashboard
> 
> You can visualize how data in your collection change over time using Directus insights. You will find the insights dashboard under `/admin/insights`. On the insights page, create a new dashboard by clicking the central **Create Dashboard** button. This dashboard will display your temperature and humidity over time. Clicking the button opens up a modal with a form with the new dashboard's details.
> 
> ![Directus insights dashboard](./Directus_insights_dashboard.png)
> 
> On this form, give your dashboard a name, temperature-and-humidity, and click the **Save** button
> 
> ![Dashboard name](./Dashboard_name.png)
> 
> Directus dashboard allows you to create multiple charts in a dashboard. These charts are called panels. To create your first panel, click on the **Edit Panels** button at the top right. Clicking this button puts the dashboard's page in edit mode. In this mode, you can move already created panels around and create new panels. Click on the **Plus** button that appears to proceed with creating your first panel.
> 
> ![create-panel](./create-panel.png)
> 
> The panel creation flow starts with you choosing your chart type, and then inputting the details of that chart. The first panel you will create will display the temperature trends over time. Choose the bar chart and set the following following details:
> 
> 1. Collection - Temperature and Humidity
> 2. X-Axis - Date Created
> 3. Y-Axis - Temperature
> 4. Y-Axis Function - Max
> 5. Value Decimals - 2
> 6. Color - #E35168
> 
> After setting these details, click the checkmark icon button at the top right corner.
> 
> ![Bar chart details](./Bar_chart_details.png)
> 
> A scaled-down bar chart will be created. You can rescale it to increase the size. You can make it look even better by adding a title (Temperature over time) and an icon (Thermostat). Click on the edit button on the chart's card to set these details.
> 
> ![temperature chart details](./temperature_chart_details.png)
> 
> With that done, repeat the process for the humidity chart. Use the following details for the panel for humidity:
> 
> 1. Collection - Temperature and Humidity
> 2. X-Axis - Date Created
> 3. Y-Axis - Humidity
> 4. Y-Axis Function - Max
> 5. Value Decimals - 2
> 6. Color - #E35168
> 7. Panel header title - Humidity over time
> 8. Panel header icon - Water DO
> 
> You should have the temperature and humidity charts displaying how your values changed over time. You can conclude this section by saving this dashboard.
> 
> ![temperature and humidity trends over time](./temperature_and_humidity_trends_over_time.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Visualizing Data in Directus Insights

Directus Insights allows you to create multiple panels in a dashboard, powered by data in your project.

To show the change over time for temperature, create a bar chart with the following settings:

1. Collection - Temperature and Humidity
2. X-Axis - Date Created
3. Y-Axis - Temperature
4. Y-Axis Function - Max
5. Value Decimals - 2
6. Color - #E35168

You can repeat this for humidity, and any other data inside of your project. 

![temperature and humidity trends over time](./temperature_and_humidity_trends_over_time.png)
```

> ## Conclusion
> 
> In this tutorial, you learned how to collect temperature and humidity data from a DHT22 sensor and log it to a database with the aid of Directus. You learned how to visualize how this data changes over time using Directus dashboards.
> 
> Directus presents a complete BaaS solution allowing you to build content-focused and traditional web applications. It offers a plethora of services including database mirroring, user authentication, OAuth2, and HTTP APIs over data (REST and GraphQL). You can self-host Directus or use their cloud API with reasonable pricing. [Try Directus today](https://directus.cloud/)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Summary

In this tutorial, you learned how to collect temperature and humidity data from a DHT22 sensor and log it to a Directus project. You also learned how to visualize how this data changes over time using Directus Insights.
```
